esp32/README.md, before:

# ESP32 Firmware

The ESP32 firmware acts as a WiFi interface the STM32 module. It gets binary data through the I2C connection with the ESP32 and uploads it to a configured web address. The binary response is then passed back to the STM32 for decoding. The ESP32 handles *only* the WiFi interface. It is up to the STM32 to check all errors relating to decoding binary data.

## Flashing

> Before running the following ensure you have updated the ports in `platformio.ini` described in the root [README.md](../README.md).

The esp32 is programmed through a bootloader through UART. A USB to TTL convert is required to program the microcontroller with your computer and can be found cheaply online. Ensure it supports 3.3V logic levels. Connect `TX` to `RX` and `RX` to `TX`, `RTS`, `CTS`, and `GND`. We recommend not connecting `Vcc` as it is already powered through the USB connection. More recent versions of the board have the header removed.

### VSCode

Check the correct environment is selected. Should be `env:esp32 (esp32)`

![VSCode env](../images/vscode_env_esp32.jpeg)

Goto *PlatformIO Tab -> Project Tasks -> Upload and Monitor*

![VSCode Upload and Monitor](../images/vscode_upload_monitor.jpeg)

### CLI

The following can be used to flash the firmware on the esp32

```bash
pio run -e release -t upload -t monitor
```

> Note: If you do not have `RTS` and `CTS` connected, you will need to load into the bootloader mode. This can be done by holding the `BOOT` button while pressing the `RESET` button for the esp32. The buttons are located right above the esp32 module.

## Testing

We have included the python script `tools/http_server.py` to enable testing the WiFi interface of the ESP32. By default the server simulates a success POST request, returning a `200` response. The flag `--error` allows for a `418` to test error handling. See `http_server.py --help` for more usage information. We recommend hosting a WiFi network for the ESP32 on your local machine. An alternative is having your local machine and ESP32 connected to the same WiFi network. The following are instructions for testing the firmware on the ESP32:

1. **Configure local WiFi network (Optional)** If you are using a shared WiFi network, skip this step and set `ssid` and `pass` in the ESP32 firmware to the shared WiFi network. 

*Unix*

Create the hotspot using NetworkManager. Replace `ifname` with the name of your wireless interface.

```
nmcli dev wifi hotspot con-name spstesting ifname [ifname] ssid spstesting password "test1234"
```

To stop the hotspot.

```bash
nmcli connection down spstesting
```

To reactivate the hotspot.

```bash
nmcli connection up spstesting
```

To delete the connection.

```bash
nmcli connection delete spstesting
```

*macOS*

TODO

*Windows*

TODO


2. **Start HTTP server.** By default the server listens on all interface on port `8080`.

```bash
python http_server.py
```

3. **Update connection parameters for the WiFi network and server address.** The WiFi network should be the same network that your device connected to. Replace `[your ip address]` with the IP address of your local machine. By default the port is `8080`.

```c++
const char ssid[] = "spstesting";
const char pass[] = "test1234";

Dirtviz api("[your ip address]", 8080);
```

4. **Flash the ESP32.** Use the following command to select the correct environment for `example_dirtviz.cpp`. See [Flashing](#flashing) for more information.

```bash
pio run -e example_dirtviz -t upload
```

5. Monitor the server terminal and serial output to ensure data is being properly sent.

Commit message:

Moved html file to littlefs
See #258

esp32/README.md, after:

# ESP32 Firmware

The ESP32 firmware acts as a WiFi interface the STM32 module. It gets binary data through the I2C connection with the ESP32 and uploads it to a configured web address. The binary response is then passed back to the STM32 for decoding. The ESP32 handles *only* the WiFi interface. It is up to the STM32 to check all errors relating to decoding binary data.

## Flashing

> Before running the following ensure you have updated the ports in `platformio.ini` described in the root [README.md](../README.md).

The esp32 is programmed through a bootloader through UART. A USB to TTL convert is required to program the microcontroller with your computer and can be found cheaply online. Ensure it supports 3.3V logic levels. Connect `TX` to `RX` and `RX` to `TX`, `RTS`, `CTS`, and `GND`. We recommend not connecting `Vcc` as it is already powered through the USB connection. More recent versions of the board have the header removed.

### VSCode

Check the correct environment is selected. Should be `env:esp32 (esp32)`

![VSCode env](../images/vscode_env_esp32.jpeg)

> NOTE: If the filesystem needs to updated you will need to run `Upload File System image` before `Upload and Monitor`. THe filesystem store html webpages for the configuration portal.

Goto *PlatformIO Tab -> Project Tasks -> Upload and Monitor*

![VSCode Upload and Monitor](../images/vscode_upload_monitor.jpeg)

### CLI

The following can be used to flash the firmware on the esp32

> NOTE: These must be separate commands or else the firmmware will not be updated.

```bash
pio run -e release -t uploadfs
pio run -e release -t upload -t monitor
```

> Note: If you do not have `RTS` and `CTS` connected, you will need to load into the bootloader mode. This can be done by holding the `BOOT` button while pressing the `RESET` button for the esp32. The buttons are located right above the esp32 module.

## Testing

We have included the python script `tools/http_server.py` to enable testing the WiFi interface of the ESP32. By default the server simulates a success POST request, returning a `200` response. The flag `--error` allows for a `418` to test error handling. See `http_server.py --help` for more usage information. We recommend hosting a WiFi network for the ESP32 on your local machine. An alternative is having your local machine and ESP32 connected to the same WiFi network. The following are instructions for testing the firmware on the ESP32:

1. **Configure local WiFi network (Optional)** If you are using a shared WiFi network, skip this step and set `ssid` and `pass` in the ESP32 firmware to the shared WiFi network. 

*Unix*

Create the hotspot using NetworkManager. Replace `ifname` with the name of your wireless interface.

```
nmcli dev wifi hotspot con-name spstesting ifname [ifname] ssid spstesting password "test1234"
```

To stop the hotspot.

```bash
nmcli connection down spstesting
```

To reactivate the hotspot.

```bash
nmcli connection up spstesting
```

To delete the connection.

```bash
nmcli connection delete spstesting
```

*macOS*

TODO

*Windows*

TODO


2. **Start HTTP server.** By default the server listens on all interface on port `8080`.

```bash
python http_server.py
```

3. **Update connection parameters for the WiFi network and server address.** The WiFi network should be the same network that your device connected to. Replace `[your ip address]` with the IP address of your local machine. By default the port is `8080`.

```c++
const char ssid[] = "spstesting";
const char pass[] = "test1234";

Dirtviz api("[your ip address]", 8080);
```

4. **Flash the ESP32.** Use the following command to select the correct environment for `example_dirtviz.cpp`. See [Flashing](#flashing) for more information.

```bash
pio run -e example_dirtviz -t upload
```

5. Monitor the server terminal and serial output to ensure data is being properly sent.
